---
layout:     post
title:      "Rain Vs. Reality: Conflicting Truths"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2014-11-4 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "img/singin.jpg"
---

<p>Gene Kelly’s 1952 film, Singin’ in the Rain is loaded with scenes of uplifting dance, song, and comedy.  When the film is looked at with a critical eye, it will find that there is a peppering of commentary regarding conflict.  This conflict occurs in two different forms: one, within the world that Gene Kelly has created, and that is shared between the characters.  The other form in Singin’ in the Rain, lies betwixt the world of the film, and reality; hence the title I have given this response.  Among the scenes containing conflicting undertones, the one which I will choose to analyze is, believe it or not, the very first.  Primarily, I will uncover the conflict present directly in the scene.  Then, I will move to the conflict that is insinuated between the faux-Hollywood created by Gene Kelly, and reality at the time of the film’s release.<br>
There are a few important things to note regarding the context of the opening scene in Singin’ in the Rain before any theoretical analysis of the conflict can be done.  First, we, the audience must keep in mind that this is only the opening scene.  There have been no character developments at this point; the film has just started, however we are already exposed to internal and external conflict.  Next, we must also keep in mind the fact that the film was released in 1952.  The setting of the film, however is Hollywood in 1927.  The separation of these dates will prove to be important when I discuss the external conflict present in the picture.<br>
The first instance of conflict shown in Singing in the Rain is presented in the opening lines of the gossip reporter.  When the reporter announces the title of the premiere and it’s actors, the camera dollies or tracks inward to a close up of a gossip magazine.  The front page reads, “Lockwood and Lamont: Reel Life or Re-al Life Romance?”  Although there is no dialogue, and this conflict does not arise in the opening scene, this gossip magazine, as well as the reporter’s line of questioning regarding the relationship status of Don and Lina, sets the stage for the rest of the film.  Throughout the film, Lina acts as though she and Don are lovers, while Don is clearly uninterested.  The internal conflict being that the gossip plays a part in the two actors’ relationship is dualed with the external commentary on the effect that the media has on celebrities.<br>
Secondly, although seemingly unimportant, Cosmo Brown arrives to the premiere and jumps excitedly out of his car.  The crowd stands up to applaud, but then having realized Cosmo is without Don or Lina, heaves an unimpressed sigh.  The fact that Cosmo shows up to the premiere alone, while Don and Lina show up together quickly enlightens the audience as to Cosmo’s role; always in the shadow of Don’s limelight; similarly, always playing the third wheel type.<br>
Now, if we are looking at the opening scene of Singing in the Rain as if it were a part of a legitimate reality, we have to look critically at the dialogue between the characters.  For instance, when Don and Lina show up to their premiere, they are, of course flooded with attention; primarily from the gossip reporter.  Yes, the questions that the reporter poses to the two are important to note, regarding their relationship status, however, it is the responses that require the most criticism.  Not only do neither Don nor Lina deny their alleged romance, but Don is the only one providing responses.  We cannot, however, take this as camera shyness from Lina, as she is clearly attempting to contribute her thoughts to the reporter.  Don is shouldering her out from any conversation.  The audience comes to learn that this is in part due to Lina’s absolutely ridiculous speaking voice, but it is also the conflict that drives Lina, in the end, to pursue her own goals and ambitions.  It is this conflict, presented in the opening scene, that makes Lina feel unappreciated for her contributions to the studio.  Further, to express concern for external conflict, this could certainly be a commentary on how Hollywood at the time was a boys’ club, and women were given little to no means to express their own opinions.<br>
Although I have covered several instances of internal and external conflict within the first scene of Singing in the Rain, there are many more to be found.  The opening scene of Singing in the Rain is rife with examples of conflict that pan out towards the end of the film.  I find it important to note that not only are the examples of conflict present within the world of the film, but that they are relatable to the world outside that of the film as well.</p>
