---
layout:     post
title:      "Vertov and the Train"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2014-12-20 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "img/train.jpg"
---

<p>Dziga Vertov’s 1929 documentary Man With The Movie Camera employs significant leaps, in terms of visuality and visual style, from the films of its era.  For a film made in such a technologically strapped epoch compared to today’s standards, MWTMC uses some fairly impressive visual techniques in order to get its messages across to the audience.  This response will aim at discussing Vertov’s visual style with specific regards to the theme of trains and train tracks in MWTMC.  Further, concerning the voice of this documentary, I will discuss some of the tactics that Vertov uses in order to portray his argument.<br>
	A particularly highly used and highly loaded visual theme in MWTMC is that of locomotion.  Several times, at very important times throughout the film, Vertov shows us the train tracks and trains in motion, all from different points of view and different angles.  The first instance in which a train and train track is shown in the film comes at a major pivot point.  The introduction of the film, for the first eight minutes or so shows the city asleep very early in the morning.  Nothing is going on downtown, the streets are barren.  Suddenly, almost out of nowhere, we see the image of a man filming an oncoming train while he is right in the middle of the tracks laying down.  We see the train approaching the man in real time and it immediately creates tension.  If we look at the reflexive nature of this moment as well, we realize that the camera which is capturing the man filming, is too, right in the middle of the tracks.  Nine minutes into a fairly slow, lulling start, the audience is suddenly asking questions:  Is the train going to stop?  Are we about to witness this man (and our camera) get obliterated by this beast of an engine?  Just before the train makes its assumed impact, Vertov uses a bunch of quick cuts where its hard to tell exactly what is occurring.<br>
	We then jump to an extreme close up of a woman tossing in slumber and waking up to start the day.  The presumed impact of the train is the trigger to start the day for the bustling city.  Vertov is aiming to show how important the train is to the city with this previous clip.  The train being a symbol of industry, MWTMC very much employs propaganda elements calling for, and celebrating the amount of industrial work and production in this Soviet city.  The train blasts through the city, its citizens start to arise, production is about to explode.<br>  
	With regards to documentary voice, MWTMC possesses a healthy combination of a few modes.  Vertov employs elements stemming from the poetic mode, as well as containing clear signs of reflexivity.  The documentary voice is the specific way in which an argument or perspective is expressed.  There are certain things that we must keep in mind when analyzing the messages put forth by Vertov.  Firstly, since MWTMC was made in 1929, and it is a silent film, Vertov had to overcome the obstacle of not using a “voice of God” in order to portray his rhetoric.  This means, of course, that Vertov was extremely in tune with his visual style, not having to worry about what he was going to say, or interview subjects.  Since the visuality of this documentary is the only way in which the audience could assess his arguments, Vertov had to be as clear as possible through his visuality.  As I mentioned earlier, the train is only one of the visual themes present in MWTMC and the repeated imagery builds greatly with other thematic content in the documentary in order to establish coherency and thought-provoking argument.<br>
	Vertov’s MWTMC possesses many visual themes which are used to aid the film’s meaning making process.  Most prevalent of which, in my mind, is that of the train and train tracks.  Dziga Vertov is extremely conscious of his tactics in showing trains and train tracks in different ways and different points of access throughout the film.  Vertov’s goals at using these broad visual themes aid the audience in deciphering and engaging with arguments.</p>
