---
layout:     post
title:      "Iconographic Motifs for the Bunch"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2014-11-21 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "img/thebunch.jpg"
---

<p>Sam Peckinpah’s The Wild Bunch is an iconographically loaded film, as it is located in a specific arena.  The Western genre is one of the most recognizable through it’s image systems, motifs, and décor.  The Wild Bunch in particular is filled to the brim with messages.  This response will deal with two of the most important iconographic motifs present in the film.  Firstly, this film represents the death of the western frontier.  Secondly, there is a hyper stylized infatuation with violence and gore in The Wild Bunch.  Both of these iconographic motifs play a prevalent role in the film; both in relation to each other, and to overall meaning making.<br>
	When we hear that we are going to screen a western film, there are very specific things we expect to see.  For instance, we know there will be a few pairs of cowboy boots, characters on horseback, and dusty landscapes.  In addition, we can also expect to see outlaws of some sort who are caught up in robbing a train, or holding up a town center.  All of these elements are present in The Wild Things.  The nature by which they exist, however, is unusual compared to what we are typically dealt.  The first scene quickly raises questions regarding the time period.  For instance, we see the gang riding into town dressed in United States soldier uniforms.  While arguably most western films are set shortly after, or during the Civil War, we notice that the uniforms of the gang resemble the those of neither the Union, nor Confederate armies.  This immediately tells us that the setting must be the turn of the century.<br>  
Further, the guns that are used in the film do not fulfill our typical expectations for the western genre.  While we might expect to see six-shooting revolvers and bottom cocking shotguns, most of the characters have seemed to upgrade to semi-automatic pistols, and twelve gauge pump shotguns.  This is another quick hint that the time period setting may be later than we typically expect.<br>
What do these clues that make us question the setting entail for the meaning making of the film?  As the film progresses we learn the characters’ uneasy feelings towards their futures as bandits.  The United States government is catching up with the outlaws; and soon, their time of robbing trains in the US will come to an end.  This occurs by hardly any other means than because the times are changing.  We can see how tired characters like Deke and Pike are no longer at their criminal peaks; another commentary on how the industry is not exactly churning out fresh guns as it once was.  At one point in the film, Pike comments, "We've got to start thinking beyond our guns. Those days are closing fast."  The fact that the characters actually realize that their careers are coming to a close makes an even bolder statement to the audience about what is transpiring.<br>
The second bold iconographic element that is present in The Wild Bunch is a gratification of violence and gore.  When discussing the film, director Sam Peckinpah stated, “"The point of the film is to take this façade of movie violence and open it up, get people involved in it so that they are starting to go in the Hollywood television predictable reaction syndrome, and then twist it so that it's not fun anymore, just a wave of sickness in the gut ... It's ugly, brutalizing, and bloody awful; it's not fun and games and cowboys and Indians. It's a terrible, ugly thing, and yet there's a certain response that you get from it, an excitement, because we're all violent people."<br> 
From the first scene to the last, there are many instances of extreme violence and gore that had not yet been experienced in American cinema.  We must consider when the film was made.  Released in 1969, The Wild Bunch was surrounded in an era which contained a high amount of change.  The Vietnam War was the first of it’s kind to be broadcasted on television, as news studios attempted to validate the war effort.  Peckinpah’s use of hyper dramaticized violence and gore is an attempt to comment on the American public’s newfound obsession.<br>  
In a typical western film we might see two characterized opponents facing off in the middle of a dusty town square who quickdraw to the death.  In The Wild Bunch, however, the violence is elongated into enormous, elaborate sequences using slow-motion and zooms.  This enforces Peckinpah’s commentary on the glorification of violence in American culture.<br>
The Wild Bunch is iconographically loaded with regards to genre.  Typically, the western film genre deals a specific set of expectations for the audience.  Peckinpah’s The Wild Bunch breaks those boundaries with the death of the frontier, and a hyper infatuation of violence.</p>

