---
layout:     post
title:      "Opposing Views of Training"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2014-11-16 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "triumph.jpg"
---

<p>Leni Riefenstahl's 1935 film, Triumph of the Will sheds light on a pre-war Germany who is still recovering from the crushing blow of World War I.  Hitler had recently risen to power and had established himself as one of the most notable authoritative figures of German history.  While Triumph is certainly propagandistic and we now have historical context regarding what Hitler’s Germany was to become, we can still appreciate the filming quality of Riefenstahl.<br>
	While Riefenstahl’s Triumph was filmed with a pre-war context, Frank Capra’s 1942 documentary, Prelude to War portrays a view at brief history; the few years before, and beginning of World War II.  Prelude to War is again, immensely propagandistic, yet from the American point of view.  Prelude attempts to let the audience decide for themselves (but not really!) if war is the best option for the American people due to the “stooges” that the free world face.<br>
Both films employ the use of inherent mantras like liberty, freedom and patriotism, however the ways in which these lofty goals are ascertained are extremely different.  This response will examine one short sequence from both Triumph of the Will and Prelude to War in order to flush out these differences in approach, as well as to highlight stylization of their filmmakers.<br>
In Triumph of the Will, Riefenstahl makes a point, several times, to incorporate the joy and willingness of 1935 German life.  One of the most significant instances of this comes at the 13:44 mark of the film.  We see a superimposed image of a church-bell ringing dissolving into the order and alignment of the German soldiers’ training camp tents.  Aerial establishing shots of the camp illuminate the breadth of the German army, as well as the discipline that falls among the ranks.  Suddenly, morning has broken and young boys begin playing patriotic music.  German men come out of their tents to begin their day of leisure during a montage that eerily reminds me of Robin Hood: Men in Tights with shots of extreme enjoyment of shaving, haircuts and washing.  While all of this continues on screen, we must remember that there is distinct purpose behind the action.  The tag-team wrestling intercut with young, beautiful Aryan boys laughing in hysterics functions as a device to showcase the German toughness and discipline, along with love of sport, youth and a good blonde head of hair.  All in all, Riefenstahl is not subtle in her efforts as a filmmaker to capture exactly what she has been told to capture through keywords; she gets to decide how to capture it.  Triumph, along with being a propaganda piece, contains many stylistic choices with regards to meaning making.<br>
While Triumph emits a certain glow throughout its filming process in order to inspire hope, patriotism and freedom, Capra’s Prelude to War can be seen to portray much darker imaging.  Further, while Triumph focusses mostly on Germany from within, Prelude focusses on American policy looking outward at other nations.  The main focus of Prelude is clearly Germany, Japan and Italy, as Capra wants his audience to feel the ruthlessness of their new enemies.  The sequence that I will examine more closely begins at 11:24 where Capra illuminates some of the “axis of evil”’s training tactics for their troops.  “‘Stop thinking and follow me,’ cried Hitler! ‘I will make you masters of the world!’”.  As the narrator continues to ‘translate’ the messages given to the people by Hitler, Mussolini and “the Japanese warlords”, he ingrains a dramatic sense of urgency into the audience.  Because the three dictators are gaining strength to rise up, Americans must, too, gain strength to fight for their freedom.  Capra, then goes on to list the rights which the dictators have taken away from their people: voted upon legislation, free speech, free press and free courts and jury.  Finally, Capra employs a stylistic tool of superimposing images of newspaper headlines with video reenactments showing the assassinations of former leaders and opposition to the new movements.  This tactic is used explicitly in order to put faces on the killers themselves, and keep the audience fearful of what may happen to them.<br>
Although they both go about their means through different ways, Leni Riefenstahl and Frank Capra use propaganda in their films in order to strive towards a sense of communal unity, liberty, and freedom.  Again, although these films are both propagandistic in nature, we can still appreciate their stylistic choices with connections to meaning making, and how those choices would have affected audiences of the time.<br>
	