---
layout:     post
title:      "The Style of Mr. Burns"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2014-11-2 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "img/post-bg-02.jpg"
---

<p>Considering other Ken Burns documentaries such as Jazz, or Baseball, his television mini series for PBS, Lewis &amp; Clark: The Journey of the Corps of Discovery is fairly short with a running time of four hours.  Within those four hours, however, Ken Burns trademark style is omnipresent.  Ken Burns’ documentary style is unique enough and canonized enough that now if you open as simple a film editing software as iMovie, you will find the ever sought Ken Burns Effect.  But what about this filmmaker’s style is so intriguing?  This response aims at examining three elements from Ken Burns’ documentary style which are employed in Lewis and Clark.
Firstly, I will begin with what I’ll call Burns’ content style in Lewis and Clark; what the filmmaker(s) allow us to see or hear.  While other documentary efforts like Jazz and Baseball focussed on vast time periods, Lewis and Clark’s expedition departed from St. Louis in 1804.  Ken Burns was able to use video segments depicting life at the time for Jazz and Baseball, however for Lewis and Clark he was not.  One would think that this factor would be very limiting: to have nobody alive at the time to conduct interviews, no video recordings, and many of the interactions taking place with obsolete languages.  What Ken Burns did have, however, was pages and pages of first hand journal accounts from those on the expedition.  While for me, making a documentary in this fashion would make my head spin, Burns has always proven to be up to the task.  So as we see in Lewis and Clark, there are no videos, there are no reenactments.  We are only given access to narration of first hand accounts and photographs.  Why does Ken Burns go this route?  Seemingly it would be much more difficult to describe such a significant event without the aid of video reenactment.  First, Ken Burns has honed in on his own content, visual, and audio style so intensely that he doesn’t need video reenactment in order to support his own meaning making.  Also, if you have seen other Burns documentaries, it is quite easy to tell that when he is making a film, he becomes quite enveloped in its era.  What I mean by this is that Ken Burns wants to tell the story as those involved would have been able to tell it.  This leads me into synthesis of his audio and visual styles, however for this response, I will separate them.
Starting with audio style, as I just mentioned above, Ken Burns attempts to tell the story as those involved would have been able to tell it.  Again, as there were no audio recorders transferable to today’s technological advances, there are no soundbites of Meriwether Lewis in Burns’ Lewis and Clark.  Burns was “forced” to use the journal entries of those on the expedition as his soundbites for the film.  He does this in textbook Burns form.  Each of the members of the expedition, as well as other characters from along the travel gets a voice actor.  Each voice actor is given pages of their characters’ journal transcriptions.  As we can rapidly see, Burns employs a high level of narration throughout his films in order to depict reality.  Each of these characters clearly embodies their own personalities and traits through merely narration.  By this simple process, Burns brings the likes of Meriwether Lewis, William Clark, and Thomas Jefferson back to life in order to educate audiences of today.  I argue, beyond the reason that I have already put forth, that Ken Burns employs this tactic in order to animate the historical context, giving the audience a more processable relationship with the characters.
Finally, Ken Burns’ visual style is the most canonized aspect of his documentaries.  Again, as there were no film cameras in 1804, Burns was “forced” to resort to pictures of people, landscapes, and texts as visual stimulants in Lewis and Clark.  With these visuals, in order to bring them to life, Ken Burns employs the aptly named Ken Burns Effect.  Combining a pan or tilt of the camera with a zoom in on a specific point in a still image, the audience gets a very much enhanced view of what Burns is attempting to depict.  Burns will employ this process of which I have just described for a period of around twenty seconds or so.  Not only does this allow Burns to keep other photographs in reserve for other sections of the documentary, but it creates a relationship between photograph and viewer.  While Burns highlights exactly what he wants the audience to acknowledge, we are allowed an extended window to examine these photographs, landscapes, and texts in order to put ourselves in the time and space of the artifact.
Although Ken Burns implements this content, audio, and visual style in all of his documentary efforts, I argue that without available means of certain modes of communication between the era in question, and audiences of today, Lewis and Clark acts as the pinnacle of culmination between these three factors.  For those who have not seen other Burns’, do so.  His style and voice are present and moving.</p>

