---
layout:     post
title:      "Notorious' Trust-Complex"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2014-11-25 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "img/notorious.jpg"
---

<p>Alfred Hitchcock’s 1946 film, Notorious harps on many important themes including notoriety, alcohol, and sexual tension.  The most prominent theme in the film, however is trust.  Throughout Notorious, trust is withheld, or given; whether it is duly earned or given unpremeditatedly.  This response will delve into the characters’ responses or reactions to trust.  When Alfred Hitchcock was asked about the themes of the film he responded: “The story of Notorious is the old conflict between love and duty. Cary Grant's job—and it's rather an ironic situation—is to push Ingrid Bergman into Claude Rains's bed. One can hardly blame him for seeming bitter throughout the story, whereas Claude Rains is a rather appealing figure, both because his confidence is being betrayed and because his love for Ingrid Bergman is probably deeper than Cary Grant's. All of these elements of psychological drama have been woven into the spy story.”  This response will deal with the three main characters: T.R. Devlin, Alicia Huberman, and Alexander Sebastian.<br>
	T.R. Devlin’s reaction to trust is extremely interesting in Notorious.  It becomes clear immediately that Devlin does not shell out his trust easily.  The first scene that we are introduced to Dev is during the party where everybody is drinking heavily in the living room setting.  However, although we can see all of the characters drinking, dancing, and conversing, T.R Devlin’s face is not even shown to the audience for the longest take of the film.  As shown below, Dev has his back turned to the camera and is cast in shadows, immediately making his character seem mysterious.As the film continues, the audience literally and figuratively begin to be more enlightened to Dev’s character.  The climax of Devlin’s impartation of trust is to his love interest, Alicia, while the two are sharing an extremely awkward honeymoon phase.  Even during this time, however, Devlin is still quite guarded.  In the clip below (starting at 47:00), Dev gets his trust betrayed by Alicia when he learns that she has “made a new playmate” in Sebastian.<br>  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FrXM7dC9PoQ<br>
He then goes into a hyper-defensive, sarcastic wit-fit, where he insults Alicia and says that he never “believed in her”.  This shows how cagey and untrusting Carey Grant’s Devlin really is.  The problem that the audience should have with Devlin’s actions, however, is that he was the one who set up Alicia as sexual bait, or “prey”(as mentioned in class) to Sebastian.  Devlin is not able to accept responsibility for his actions, but this refers back to the quotation from Hitchcock, describing the intertwining of love and “the mission” throughout Notorious.<br>
Devlin’s counterpart, and dualist is Alicia Huberman; played by Ingrid Bergman.  In his book, “Spellbound by Beauty: Alfred Hitchcock and His Leading Ladies” Donald Spoto states, “The basic concern of Notorious is a twofold redemption: a woman's need to be trusted and loved, which will enable her to transcend a life that has become empty of affection and riddled with guilt;”(p. 157).  Spoto’s argument that Alicia feels a need to be trusted by everyone is valid.  Alicia is constantly seeking people’s approval, like when she asks the Commodore, “Do you love me?”  Or, using the link above (from 23:25-25:55), Alicia is physically latched onto Devlin while the two are in their hotel.  This example makes the audience feel particularly unnerved, because the two have just recently started their affair, and already Alicia is saying that she wants to cook for Devlin and she is quite literally all over him.  Devlin, on the other hand remains more reserved and removed, withholding his trust from Alicia.<br>  
Finally, apart from the poor display of trust from Devlin and the need for trust from Alicia, Alexander Sebastian puts forth his trust in people too easily.  This doling of trust by Sebastian, played by Claude Rains, leads him into trouble at the end of the film.  Before the audience even encounters Sebastian, we are informed of the “enormity of [his] stupidity”, as put so nicely by Sebastian’s mother.  Alicia tells Dev about how when she was younger, Sebastian lusted after her; and how she would plan to use his weakness to complete the mission.  Seamlessly, Sebastian regresses and immediately falls for Alicia.  Even though the sting operation that Alicia and Devlin are attempting to conduct is meant to flush out Sebastian’s plans, the Sebastian that Hitchcock delivers to the audience is one of the most relatable, most sympathized with “villains” in cinema.  More than anything else, Sebastian wants his love for Alicia to be reciprocated.<br>
One of the most important themes in Hitchcock’s Notorious is the concept of trust.  Whether the three main characters are withholding trust, feeling a need to be trusted, or are overly trusting, the theme is certainly present.</p>