---
layout:     post
title:      "Fishing with Nanook"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2015-01-08 12:00:00
author:     "Connor Laubenstein"
header-img: "img/nanook.jpg"
---

<p>Apart from the loaded scenes that we discussed in class, along with the ones we read about in our readings, there are many other scenes in Nanook of the North that are worth closely analyzing.  With regards to cinematography and editing style, one of the most loaded scenes in the documentary is when Nanook “saves the day” and fishes for his family.  Firstly I will layout what we see on the screen during that scene.  then I will discuss the editing style that Robert Flaherty imposes on the film.  Finally, I will go over some pertinent questions that connect this scene to the meaning making of the film, as well as how Flaherty attempts to control the essence of reality that we, the viewers, see on screen.<br>
	Right off the bat, chronologically speaking, the fishing scene is delivered immediately after we see Nanook and his family at the trading post, being “banqueted” by the “white man”.  the previous scene depicts Nanook and his family being somewhat mocked on screen.  the transition between that scene and the one where Nanook fishes on the ice floes is done by a cue card that reads, “A wandering ice field drifts in from sea and locks up a hundred miles of coast.  Though Nanook’s band, already on the thin edge of starvation, is unable to move.  Nanook, great hunter that he is, saves the day.”  the next shot shows Nanook traversing the ice floes in his kayak, and then with his guise, a harpoon looking for a good fishing spot.  Something that must be considered during this montage is camera placement.  While Nanook is risking life and limb jumping around through the ice floes, the camera jumps to different points and angles, and is not following Nanook.  This is an important distinction to be made.  Flaherty is clearly telling Nanook to wait while he sets the camera at one point, tells Nanook to start running until he is past the camera, and the process is repeated.  Of course while Nanook is actually doing all of this dangerous traversing, the audience must keep in mind that it’s not entirely in real time.<br>  
Another camera position issue in this scene is when Nanook is physically fishing with his lure and pronged spear.  there are several camera positions in this section of the scene which are troubling.  the way that the shot is framed suggests that Nanook is hanging himself over the ice into open water.  However, at one point, the camera is positioned almost immediately above Nanook as he is fishing.  Since at this time, there were no zoom lenses on the cameras, there is clearly some framing control in use by Flaherty.<br>
	Briefly, with regards to editing style, Flaherty’s Nanook of the North is quite simple.  Like how there are no zoom lenses, there is also no way to make a dissolve/fade, or a swipe, or any other great transitions that we see in iMovie.  However, Flaherty uses the tools that he has at his disposal.  As far as transitions go, during the silent film era, Flaherty makes use of cue cards throughout the film, not only as descriptors, but as to smooth out transitions from scene to scene.<br>  
	Much unlike films of today, Flaherty does not use a lot of quick cuts on screen.  Mostly, as we can see Nanook loading up his kayak with his day’s catch, long takes are used in order to catch all of the action.  However, while Nanook is traversing the ice floes to find a fishing spot, Flaherty imposes a fairly quick set of cuts for the time, that audiences would have been impressed by.<br>
	All of the cinematography and editing style in this scene of Nanook of the North connects to meaning making in the film.  Robert Flaherty clearly had a relationship with “Nanook”.  As an audience watching this film with an unknowing about the way that this film was made, we would be intrigued by the relationship that the filmmaker and the subject must have had in order to gain access to this footage.  However there are certain things that Flaherty wanted us to see.  Like any filmmaker, Flaherty was extremely conscious of what he was putting on the screen.  All of this contributes to meaning making.<br>
	Throughout Nanook of the North, there are many loaded scenes in terms of cinematography and editing style.  When Nanook fishes for his family, filmmaker Robert Flaherty uses certain techniques in order to make sure the audience sees what he wants them to see.  Even though Flaherty imposes a level of control into his film, Nanook of the North still captures an essence of reality, making it a classic documentary.</p>
